Hand-painted 3D art is a generic term
for any style in which digital objects
are designed to appear as if they are in
a painting rather than looking 3D.
Conventionally, the process of painting
objects in this style is entirely
digital since the objects themselves are
digital. With plenty of programs like
Blender even allowing artists to paint
directly onto models by using drawing
tablets. It is theoretically possible to
paint them using real physical paint on
canvas. There's just not usually a
reason to do so given the ease and
accessibility of digital methods.
However, I am a stubborn traditional
artist and if I'm going to make
hand-painted 3D art, I'll do it with my
preferred medium, oil paint.
I've recently made this nice basic 3D
model of a human skull. In this video, I
will hand-paint this model by physically
painting on canvas. But first, I'll need
to tell you a bit about how we actually
make 3D models.
Most 3D models are constructed from a
large collection of completely flat
surfaces of different sizes and shapes
which are arranged to look like objects
when put together. They only look smooth
because of clever maths tricks. These
flat surfaces can be any shape as long
as it's 2D and has straight edges, but
typically we use triangles since they're
the simplest 2D shape. When we draw a 3D
object, we just calculate the position
of the corners of the triangle on screen
and then color in every pixel between
them with the color of the triangle.
Graphics cards are very good at doing
this. So much so that we can calculate
and draw millions of these triangles in
a fraction of a second in a process
called rendering. However, just making
these triangles a single color does not
look interesting. As it happens,
graphics cards can also distort images
very quickly. We could calculate of
millions of triangles on screen and then
rotate and distort millions of small
images and it would still only take a
fraction of a second. What if instead of
filling in the spaces between a
triangle's corners with a single color,
we cut an image into the correct shape,
then rotated that image so that its
corners match the triangles. Now, we've
drawn the same triangle with a more
interesting pattern. This is the basic
principle of 3D texturing. Replacing
each triangle of the model with a
transformed triangular image. There is
one question remaining though. How do we
tell the render engine what image to
paste over each triangle in a model? For
one without many triangles, it's
reasonable to imagine that we can just
load a separate image for each triangle
and draw them directly. However, this
method quickly becomes unmanageable
since most models are made from a
significant number of triangles. We
don't want to create thousands of
different images to texture a relatively
simple object. Instead of making a
separate small image for each triangle,
we create one big image called a texture
that contains all of the images put
together. We just have to tell each
triangle which area of the texture to
use. To do this, we create something
called a UV map which points each
triangle to its area of the texture. For
each triangle in the model, there is a
triangle in the UV map which is placed
somewhere on the texture. The render
engine cuts out each triangle on the
texture, then pastes it over the
corresponding triangle on the model in a
process called mapping. The point is
that a 3D object is textured using a
single flat image which is lucky since
this is what oil painting is usually
are. To make an oil painted texture, all
I need to know is what bit of the canvas
each triangle will take its image from.
The obvious method is to just print out
the UV map, paint over it, and then give
the render engine a photo of the
painting to map onto the object.
However, there is a major flaw with this
approach. While I'm painting, I'll have
no idea what the model will look like
with the painting mapped onto it.
Imagine if I spend ages painting the
texture and then I found out it looks
terrible wrapped around the model and
would need to be changed, especially
when using oil painting which would take
a long time to dry in between checking
how the model looks. Using this method,
I would give up far before I made
anything that looked good. If making
traditionally hand-painted 3D art were
to be a viable workflow for me, then I
would need to be able to see my painting
wrapped around the 3D model while I
paint it. As far as I know, nothing
designed for this purpose existed when I
started this project. So I had to roll
up my sleeves and make it myself.
[Music]
As I see it, there are three main stages
for an ideal traditional painting app.
One, streaming a live video of the
physical painting to the computer. Two,
wrapping the streamed painting around
the model. Three, displaying the
hand-painted model.
With the additional caveat that this
should all be performed in real time,
i.e. roughly the frame rate of the
webcam video so that the changes are
immediately shown on the model. Luckily,
the first stage is very easy. It's a
hardware problem that has been solved
since 1993. Webcams are very common,
cheap, and easy to use. And chances are
you have one either built into your
computer or you have a USB one somewhere
in your house. Capturing the webcam
stream in software is astonishingly
easy. Seriously, if you have a webcam on
your computer and you care about not
being seen, you should get a physical
cover and slide it right over the webcam
when you're not using it. These lines of
code are all a program on your computer
needs to see you anytime that it likes.
Easy peasy, problem solved. This project
will be done in no time if everything is
easy as that. The second stage is a bit
more difficult. We need to correct the
webcam frames before they reach the
model so that we only use the canvas
area for the texture and remove all the
background. In an ideal world, the
webcam would be pointed perfectly
straight at the canvas and it would
never move at all, in which case this
step wouldn't be necessary since the
canvas image would always line up with
the map. However, real life is
imperfect, so we need to correct the
video otherwise the canvas will be
distorted or have space around it which
prevents it from looking correct. To do
this, we need to detect the corners of
the painting and then distort the image
so that the corners of the painting are
now the corners of the image. For my
solution, I just physically mark all
four corners with a color that won't be
present in the painting itself, then
measure the central position of each
blob of pixels in the image which are
roughly the marked color. I found that
this very basic method is sufficient to
get good corner locations, making it
easy to transform the image so that the
canvas is the full frame. Now, we can
map the painting onto the model the same
as we would for a digitally painted
texture. The final step can be
approached in a number of different ways
with varying levels of difficulty. There
are many freely available apps which
contain real-time render engines such as
Blender, Unity, and Unreal Engine. But
these apps aren't really designed to
read and correct video at runtime. This
isn't to say it's impossible to use
them. However, I thought graphics
programming would be interesting.
So I decided to write an application
with its own dedicated render engine
which corrects webcam frames and then
displays them on the model in real time
as a single contained system. I'll spare
you the exact details of the app
development, but for those of you
interested, it's written in C++ using
Vulcan as the graphics API. This is the
Bob Jack Painter. In this app, I can
load the model that I showed earlier.
Then I can set the color that will be
used for corner detection and I can see
at the side how the canvas texture looks
after being cropped. This webcam feed is
also applied to the model, meaning that
I can see how the painted texture looks
on the model in real time using only a
few button presses. Now, all that's left
is to actually paint the texture for the
model.
[Music]
So there we have it. Traditional artists
can make their own hand-painted 3D
models without giving in to working
digitally if they want to stick to their
medium. Perhaps it's less practical than
using the usual digital methods, but
texturing traditionally opens doors to
producing 3D art that would probably be
much harder to produce digitally. The
Bob Jack Painter app is open source, so
I'll include a link in the description
to the GitHub repo which also has a few
release builds for Windows devices if
you'd like to try it out yourself. If
you would like to see more short-form
videos about other 3D models or
paintings that I've made previously,
I've been posting about this project on
TikTok and Instagram for a few months.
Those videos take much less time than
this one did, so they'll probably be
posted more regularly. I also have a
website where you can read about what
I'm doing in this project or just look
at all my previous work. I hope that
this video has inspired you to make your
own 3D models with traditional methods.
I'd love to see what you guys can make
with this system.